Colon Cancer Screening
- 1 - 
A decision aid for
Why should I get screened?
Screening for colon cancer saves lives. It is important to have a screening test before 
symptoms begin. With screening, cancer can be caught in the early stages and before it 
spreads to other parts of the body. In some cases, screening prevents colon cancer. 
Fortunately, there are other screening options for people who do not want a colonoscopy.
 
This information is for you, if you:
         - Are between the ages of 50 to 75
         - Have not had colon cancer
Learn more about these tests and your options in the following pages...
What are my screening options?
Doctors generally recommend a colonoscopy, and 
a colonoscopy is a very good test.  But, some 
people do not want a colonoscopy. For people 
who do not want a colonoscopy, there is 
another test that can be done at home. It is called 
the Stool Blood Test. Colonoscopy may be a 
little bit better than Stool Blood Test, but it has 
some risks. The best test is the one that gets done.
Facts about colon cancer 
     Colon cancer starts oﬀ as a polyp in 
     the large intestine or the colon.
     Polyps are abnormal growths in the 
     colon.
     Polyps and early stage colon cancer
     do not always cause people to have 
     problems or symptoms.
     Colon cancer usually grows slowly.
You have options...
PI: Carmen Lewis, MD. COMIRB # 14-1976.
IDECIDE 
Better conversations, better decisions
- 2 - 
Which test is right for me?
Stool Blood Test
Colonoscopy
Description  of the 
screening test:
Preparation for the 
screening test:
Location of the 
screening test:
How long the screening 
test takes:
Requires help from family or 
friend on the screening
test day:
What the screening 
test ﬁnds:
What the screening test
may ﬁnd other than cancer:
How often you need the 
screening test:
Will I need follow up after
the test?
Reduces risk of death from 
colon cancer?
Chance of injury from the 
screening test:
Doctor uses a 
narrow tube to 
look inside your 
colon. The 
doctor will 
remove any polyps to prevent cancer 
from developing.
You drink medication that cleans out 
your colon the night before the test. 
This causes loose stool, gas, bloating, 
and a need to go to the bathroom 
more often. 
In the doctor’s oﬃce.
Less than 1 hour. After the test,  you 
will need the rest of the day to 
recover. Some people need several 
days to recover completely.
Yes, you will be given medication to
help you relax.  This means you will 
need someone to drive you home 
after the test. 
Polyps and colon cancer.
Polyps that are not cancer.
Every 10 years, if no polyps are found.
Every 3-5 years if polyps are found.
No.
Yes, if you complete regular 
screenings.
Out of 1,000 colonoscopies done:
3 people will have complications 
requiring hospitalization. Very rarely, 
someone may die from complications.
You will collect a 
smallstool 
sample to be
tested for blood.
There is no preparation needed. 
At home.
Less than 5 minutes.
No.
Blood in your stool, which can be from
polyps or colon cancer.
The stool test may show blood when 
nothing is wrong.
Every year, if no blood is found.
Yes, if the test ﬁnds blood, you will need
a colonoscopy. Every year, about 8 out 
of 100 people tested will need a 
follow-up colonoscopy.
Yes, if you complete yearly test.
There is no risk of injury from the Stool
Blood Test.
Colonoscopy or Stool Blood Test:
- 3 - 
Weighing your options:
Which test is right for me?
This means that:
• 3 out of every 100 people who 
  do not get screened will die 
   from colon cancer.  
• With either type of screening, 
   this goes down to 1 person 
   out of every 100. 
• 2 lives are saved with 
   screening.  
• In other words, either  test 
   lowers your chance of dying 
   from colon cancer by about 
   64%.
People who die
People who live
How many lives does screening save?
Without screening, 3 out of 100 will die
With screening, 1 out of 100 will die
» It ﬁnds polyps and removes polyps 
   during screening
» It does not have to be done yearly
» It does not involve you handling
   your stool
You may decide to have a colonoscopy 
because...
You may decide to have a stool blood test
 because...
» There is no risk of injury 
» It is done at home
» You don’t mind doing a yearly test
» You are willing to have a colonoscopy if 
   the test is positive
- 4 -
What are the next steps?
https://patientdecisionaid.org
Copyright © 2014 by The Regents of the University of Colorado on behalf of its employees: Daniel D Matlock MD MPH; Carmen Lewis MD; Nicole Richmond MPH; Amy Jenkins MS; Combs, 
Brandon MD; and Moles, Matthew MD. This work was supported through***(1K23AG040696) and the Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute (PI000116-01). Conflicts of Interest: 
Matlock - Moles: None.Reading level: 8.0.  Last Update 7/9/2015Contact: 303-724-7967 or larry.allen@cuanschutz.edu.  Some rights reserved. No part of this publication may be used in any 
commercial development or effort without the express prior written permission of the publisher.  No part of this publication may be used in any derivative work without first obtaining permission 
from the publisher and providing acknowledgement thereof. University of Colorado hereby disclaims all liability associated with the use or adoption of the information provided herein.  User shall 
remain liable for any damages resulting from his reliance on this information. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of funding 
agencies (NIH, PCORI) or medical centers. The material provided on this infographic is intended for informational purposes only and is not provided as medical advice. Any individual should consult 
with his or her own physician before determining whether a left ventricular assist device is right for him or her. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution, Non-Commercial, 
No-Derivatives 4.0 International License.
 
Screening is important for everyone, but not everyone has the same questions or concerns. 
Use the space below to write down questions or concerns you may have and want to 
discuss.  The staﬀ is here to answer your questions or concerns. If you would like to discuss 
your screening options with your personal doctor, the staﬀ can schedule this appointment 
for you.
Still not sure?
My questions and concerns are:
If you know which choice is best for you:
If  you know you will get
 a colonoscopy.
If you know you will get 
a stool blood test.
Call to schedule a colonoscopy. 
Call to request to have a stool blood test mailed to you 
with a prepaid return envelope.
You can reach Health Promotion Services staﬀ at (303) 724-5944 
Monday – Friday 8AM – 5PM.
